---
layout : post
---

# Purpose

#### Business developers and Marketers

- **Bring your product to market faster and cheaper.**  
  by learning what parts of your app truly matter and what can be scaled up later by a third party
- **Make better leadership decisions.**  
  by educating yourself in industry best-practices
- **Make better long-term financial decisions**  
  by focusing on the core aspects that make your app unique and offloading everything else to a scalable solution.
- **Improve team dynamics**  
  by being on the same page with your development team, and empathizing with the challenges they face.
- **Learn from the best.**  
  Understand the core principles behind successful technology services and apply them to your infrastructure starting tomorrow.

# Goals

# Getting Started

- Who, what, where, why, when
- Problems and solutions
- Sample Startup Project

What is a web application? Let's break that question down into its core parts:

# What is an Application?

An application is a computer software program designed for the user to perform a task.
Excel, word, photoshop are examples of _desktop_ applications.
Wikipedia, google, facebook, twitter are examples of _web_ applications, that is they exist and work primarily online.
Most web applications also have mobile apps, an application that you have to install on your phone or tablet is a _mobile_ application.

Desktop, web, iphone, Android, ipad, are examples of physical environments where applications run.
It is important to understand that applications must be created to work in the specific environment
they will run on. Creating a an app that runs on an android phone will not run on an iphone or on your laptop for example.

The Internet provides the first-ever cross-environment application environment,
it's why you want to create a modern web application of course!

The environment matters each environment can only understand certain languages and tools.
Therefore if you want your application to run on a particular environment, you have to build it _specifically for that environment_.

One reason why the internet is so popular is because it is accessible within the most environments.
Web applications are most commonly accessed via a web-browser. a web-browser exists on desktops, phones, and tablets. 
This means your single web app can work across all these environments without any extra work.

So a _web_ application is an application that works entirely through the Internet. Well what is the Internet?

# What is the Web?

In a nutshell the Internet is a network of computers. 
Any computer can be connected directly or indirectly to the Internet including your personal desktop or laptop computer.

The computers connected to the Internet can make certain content publicly accessible to other computers in the network (on the Internet).
They can also receive content that other computer's make available.

A **server** is a computer that has been tuned to serve content on the Internet in an efficient manner.
Servers use the same basic hardware as any normal computer including your laptop, the difference lies mainly in the configuration of the software.

FWIW you can technically serve a website to the entire planet using only your personal laptop computer - the principles are the same, only the configuration changes.

# How Does the Web Work?

Many books can be written about how the web works. 
This book will not cover those specifics.

The important concept for us is to understand how the web works relative to consumers of web applications.
That is to say if I make a web application, how does the web enable my users to consume my product?

As we've covered, the Internet is a network of computers.
All computers in the network can send and receive information.
**Servers** serve up content to the your customers, the end users.

The medium with which an end-user interacts with your web content is called **The client**

Let's visualize this relationship:

        [client]  [client]  [client]
          |         |          |
      -------------------------------- Internet
          |          |            |
      [Server]    [Server]     [Server]



## The Client

We've covered the importance of understanding the different physical environments applications run on.

Traditionally, if you wanted to run an application on your Windows laptop, you had to download Windows
compatible software. If you had a mac you have to get the mac version.

Today we have the internet. One of the best things about the internet is that
it provides a cross-environment **Client interface** to access anything available online.

This client is known as the **Web Browser**. 

A web browser exists on:

- Windows computers
- Mac computers
- Linux computers
- iphone mobile devices
- android mobile devices
- ipad tablets
- android tablets

Each of these devices also has a "device specific" application platform. These are known as "apps"
For example Apple has a mac OSX "app store" where you can download software for your computer.
The client in this case would be your mac OSX operating system.
iphone, android, and ipad all have installable apps that work separate from the web browser but can still use the Internet.

All of these are different clients, different mediums that a user can potentially access your application from.

Because they all leverage they Internet, they can all be thought of as **Web Applications** consumed by various web-enabled **Clients**

Programming an app for all these damned scenarios sounds pretty intense.
Well it is, but modern strategies are pretty cool - it's what you are about to learn.

      [desktop app]  [iphone]  [ipad]  [web browser]
        |         |          |
    ------------------------------------------------ Internet
        |          |            |
    [Server]    [Server]     [Server]


### Client-side Programming

Most all client environments are capable of executing code instructions _on their end_.
That is to say your server can send raw programming code to a client and the client 
will execute that code _after_ it receives it.

This is very important because it turns a static web application,
into a living, dynamic application.

Modern web applications tend to push massive amounts of code from the server out to the client
where the client executes most all of the applications features in the background.

Client side programming is useful because it provides a more responsive user experience.
Instead of the client going back to the server for every user activity, the client can either carry out the job itself,
(for example calculating the total of a shopping cart) or if it needs to go the server, it can do so _in the background_.


The technical term for when a client works on concurrent tasks _in the background_ is **asynchronous programming**.


## The Server

Web applications physically exists on the servers. 

If the application itself is on a server, how are clients able to use the application?

Well the servers and clients can talk to eachother back and forth by way of the internet.

The server can expose endpoints to the client that do different things based on how the user interacts with those endpoints.
You know these endpoints as URLs.

Each and every server on the internet has a unique IP address assigned to it.
Domain names are mapped to IP addresses to make it easier to access computers without needing to remember their IP address.

### Server-side Programming

## Client-Server Interaction

When you go to google.com you are making a web request to the server IP that is mapped to the domain name google.com
The server sends back a response that the client renders into a human readable result, in this case it's the search bar.

As a user, you can enter some text into the searchbar and click enter.
The client takes your text and sends it _back_ to the server based on the URL specified by the text input form.
Let's say this URL is http://www.google.com/search

http://www.google.com/search is a separate URL from http://www.google.com so when the server gets data back at this URL
it is programmed to carry out a function specific to that URL. In these case all sorts of magic happens, google searches its index, builds a webpage
and sends out the response back to the client.

    [diagram: Facebook interactions between client and server]

All user-facing web applications work this way. Servers can provide an unlimited number of special access points to their app by way of the URLs.
You visit your friend's facebook page by navigating to a specific URL.
You can post messages on their wall by having the client send your text to a URL of that friend's wall.


# Web Application Design

In our last diagrams we exposed the relationship between **client**, **Internet**, and **Server**
We learned the roles of each component: 
the servers provide the application by means of URL endpoints to the various clients via the Internet.
Now we'll learn _how_ that happens.
  
## Backend

The "backend" is a developer term used to describe all the **server** related components of a web application.
You will soon discover that modern web applications use _many_ servers applied in a wide range of configuration formats.

The backend is responsible for serving up the necessary content that is required to run your web application.
This content may consist of:

- media
  Images, videos, music files, pdfs, downloadable media documents
  can all be sent over the internet to available clients.
- text/html/css
- data (json/xml)
- code (javascript)

## Frontend

The "frontend" is a developer term used to describe all the **client** related components of a web application.
When the backend sends data to the client, it is the client's job to _process and render_ this data into what the end-user sees.

This book will focus on the Web Browser as it's primary client.

When media such as images, audio, video, and documents are sent to a web browser
the browser either displays them, streams them or makes them available for direct download.

Primarily a web browser renders web pages. Web pages consists of

- media files (images)
- HTML with textual content providing structure.
- CSS used to aesthetically style and layout the web page
- javascript - programming instructions capable of executing on the client end.
- raw data

All five types of information are responsible for making a modern web application.


When a client makes a web request to a domain, the request is actually _many requests_.
Some pages send html, some css, images, javascript etc.
All the web requests feed into the main web "document".
You can think of the Document as your application canvas. The document builds 
its environment using the content it receives from all its web requests.


With so many different types of content coming in, it would seem pretty complex
to design an application to support many types of web Clients.
We need to design a sane strategy for dealing with so many things going on.

## Bridge or API

The "bridge" is not a formal developer term.
The bridge is meant to describe how exactly the **Backend** manages to integrate
in a reliable way with the **client**. The bridge is largely conceptual.

The technical term for this much needed integration point is something you will hear a lot.
It is called the web application's **API** or application programming interface.

We've learned that the backend integrates with clients by means of different URLs. 
The URL scheme is a good and necessary part of an API but we need to be even more specific
about _how the content is structured_ both when sent to the client and received by the client.

The API provides standardized integration points between your application (and all it's data) and 
the outside world, most typically the clients we've talked about.

    [diagram: example of an API request/response cycle]
    

# API Design
    
Modern web applications make extensive use of APIs because it more efficient strategy for 
serving applications to a wide and varying degree of clients.

So far we've only talked about the Web browser as a client. Web browsers make asynchronous background requests
to your applications API, in order to efficiently update the user interface.

Since the web browser is executing code it receives from your server, what if it received code
from another server (another website) but the code wanted to access your public API's to fetch your data?

This is the essence of social sharing. By providing a public API to your web application, you can empower
third party websites to interact with (and ultimately promote) your application via widgets, plugins, streams, etc.
It's how users embed tweets, youtube videos, music, profiles etc all throughout the web and it is _extremely powerful_
way to promote your application.

This is _only_ possible by means of a well-formed API.

## Multi Client Support

Suppose you wanted to make an android and iphone application.
You'd need to create **client** side code that can run on these specific environments.
But that doesn't mean you have to completely recreate your app from scratch.
Your client-side android/iphone app can use _the same_ exact API endpoints to bring the necessary 
data and core features from your backend into the native mobile environment.

So you can see that although you may choose to build a variety of native **frontends**
for the web browser, ipad, android, iphone experiences, 
you can also build a well-formed **bridge** or API between all of these clients to only _one_ universal backend.

Righto! We've covered all about how web applications work and the components that power them.

Now we'll learn how to make them.


#  Building Web Applications

## Backend Components

- web server
  - distrubuted computing (CLOUD)
  - load balancer (reverse proxy)
  - proxy caching (varnish)
- application layer
  - server languages
    - Language types
      - Object oriented
      - blocking/non-blocking
      - functional
    - frameworks
- database layer
- caching layer
- CDN
- job servers (mail, cron jobs etc)
  
## Frontend Components

- media
- text/html/css
- data json/xml
- code - javascript
  
  
#  Hosting Web Applications

## Shared

Shared hosting is the cheapest paid hosting you can get.
You are literally sharing one server with potentially hundreds of different websites.

One server only has so many resources so if one of those websites gets an influx of traffic
that stalls the server, all websites will experience the same stall. If one website exposes 
a security vulnerability all websites on the server are at risk.
Needless to say you should probably avoid a shared server for any business related application.

## Virtual Private Server (VPS)

A virtual private server places multiple web applications onto one physical server _but_
they are privatized virtually, through software.

So physically you still share the same server with others, but you are free to download
your own Operating system and any and all necessary software packages to run.
Each virtual instance also has pre-allocated cpu and memory dedicated to _only_ that instance.

A VPS solves all the bandwidth and security issues with the traditional shared server.

VPS offer the most bang for the buck. They are extremely inexpensive for all the power they offer.
The one drawback is that a vps must be configured by someone who knows how to setup a web-server and all of its requisite dependencies.

## Dedicated Server

A dedicated server is one physical server dedicated entirely to your application.
You are leasing the physical hardware as housed in a data-center and a free to do what you wish with it.

This option offers the most control over every aspect of your application stack (including the physical hardware)
but of course it will cost more initially to setup and maintain.

## Cloud Servers

Cloud servers can be thought of as a large army of virtual private servers.
We know that a web application backend may be composed of many servers serving different roles.

Cloud servers main benefit is that they provide _on demand_ deployment of virtual private servers to your backend cluster.
Cloud servers can be cloned literally in minutes, booted, and then deployed live.

## Infrastructure as a Service

Cloud servers are a _type_ of infrastructure as a service. 
That is a company is providing you with access to raw infrastructure computers: computing power, dns routing, database layer, text and email sending.

Iaas is very affordable but comes with a necessary caveat that you must have a 
knowledgable engineer configure all the components together in an efficient cost effective manner.

## Platform as a Service

Platforms as a Service try to solve the "knowledgable engineer" problem by completely
removing the need for your company to worry about the Backend infrastructure entirely.

The premise is that engineers need only build the application layer, then push it to the PAAS
for hosting. Literally _everything_ else at this stage is taken care of.
Load balancing, caching, dynamic generation of application server nodes, the database layer, it's all provided!

This is perhaps the fastest way to get a prototype up and running.
However PAAS is not a silver bullet. It works best when your application is already very very efficient.
PAAS customers pay for all the computing power they use so while everything is taken care of, if your app is inefficient,
your bill will climb very high very fast.

As your company matures, you'll likely _require_ the control that comes with dedicated machines
and highly skilled system administrators that are experienced in squeezing every ounce of computing power out of each and every machine.

PAAS is _unmatched_ for getting prototypes up and running and deferring complex infrastructure problems until they are really warranted,
when you have a thousand customers knocking down your door trying to pay you money.

When that time comes your best bet is to reference this book while scheduling meetings with
experienced system administrators =)


#  Frequently Asked Questions

- How do I start?
- What are some ways my startup can save money?
- Are there shortcuts you can take, like using web app building frameworks?

