
### Code on the Client

Most all client environments are capable of executing code instructions _on their end_.
That is to say your server can send raw programming code to a client and the client 
will execute that code _after_ it receives it.

This is very important because it turns a static web application,
into a living, dynamic application.

Modern web applications tend to push massive amounts of code from the server out to the client
where the client executes most all of the applications features in the background.

Client side programming is useful because it provides a more responsive user experience.
Instead of the client going back to the server for every user activity, the client can either carry out the job itself,
(for example calculating the total of a shopping cart) or if it needs to go the server, it can do so _in the background_.


The technical term for when a client works on concurrent tasks _in the background_ is **asynchronous programming**.



Web-enabled Clients leverage the Internet to build a richer user experience. A client connected to the Internet can update itself as newer versions become available. The client can also interact with and publish media using the Internet.




















Before we address our application let's start with the basics of web applications

What is it?

#### Web
When we say web we simply mean it primarily runs _on the internet_.
The benefit to an internet based application is that it is available to people all over the world.
They don't have to install anything on their end, they can simply go to your website and use your product/service.

#### Application

An application is a computer software program designed for the user to perform a task.
Excel, word, photoshop are examples of _desktop_ applications.
Wikipedia, google, facebook, twitter are examples of _web_ applications, that is they exist and work primarily online.
Most web applications also have mobile apps, an application that you have to install on your phone or tablet is a _mobile_ application.

#### Environment

As noted, applications run in different environments.
The environment matters each environment can only understand certain languages and tools.
Therefore if you want your application to run on a particular environment, you have to build it _specifically for that environment_.

One reason why the internet is so popular is because it is accessible within the most environments.
Web applications are most commonly accessed via a web-browser. a web-browser exists on desktops, phones, and tablets. 
This means your single web app can work across all these environments without any extra work.

### How the internet works.

S what is the internet? what does it mean to have an app "online".
in a nutshell the internet is a really just a network of computers.
Just normal computers too. Your computer, my computer, a computer at a library,
these can all potentially not only access the internet, but "serve content" to the internet.

Right now on your computer you can specify a folder that you would like to make accessible to the world wide internet.
This means a user will just have to type in your computer's IP address and they will have access to that folder on your computer.

IP address, domain name. got it.

Hosting something on the internet is the same. You can serve a picture, some text, some code, some data.
A web application both sends and receives information.


### Where are internet Applications?

Web applications physically exists on the servers. The servers are connected to the internet and 
provide public accessibility via their domain name. 
When you pay for "hosting" you renting space on the server that is connected to the internet.

When you go to google.com you are making a web request to the server IP that is mapped to the domain name google.com
The server sends back a response and the web browser process the response and renders the final, human readable result.

